I know that everyone is eager to get to the deep learning.
But before we get there,
let's try to understand why deep learning and where this field originated.
We'll go back to the old days first of classic machine learning.
Remember from lesson one how we have
three main types of imaging algorithms for 2D medical images?
There's segmentation, which helps us define outlines around
specific findings in an image and measure their size, there's localization,
which identifies the region of an image with
a certain finding and draws a bounding box around it,
and finally, there's classification,
which tells us if something is or is not present in an image.
This actually hasn't changed much with the advent of deep learning,
and these are still the main three areas of algorithm types.
The biggest difference between machine learning and
deep learning is the concept of feature selection.
Before deep learning existed,
algorithm developers had to work very hard to
predefine features in an image that were important for their task.
These features could come in a multitude of flavors,
but it is really considered an art as to how
they are crafted and refined for specific tasks,
and it takes a lot of time and effort.
An example of a feature might be the intensity gradient between adjacent pixels,
which is steeper when there is a tumor versus healthy tissue.
When deep learning came along,
it was groundbreaking because it worked to discover important features,
taking this burden off of the algorithm researchers.
Before deep learning, algorithm developers had to spend
a long time looking at their images and understanding their properties.
During this process, developers would often need
input from disease experts and radiologists about
what particular features of an image they would look at to make
their diagnoses and then translate these into features for machine learning.
Once features are defined,
they're given to an algorithm, for example,
a logistic regression or support vector machine algorithm,
to learn how these specific features differentiate between classes of images.
In the end, the algorithm returns an output based
on the separability of the features that it was exposed to.
Note that lots of these algorithms are really powerful and highly accurate,
and there are still many use cases out there for
which classic machine learning is sufficient and reliable.
With deep learning, the algorithm developer
doesn't need to start with the feature selection process.
They instead start first with the algorithms architecture.
We'll dive more into this later,
but you've probably had some experience with the CNN architecture,
which is most commonly used for classification of images.
What the human eye can detect and then integrate into the brain about images,
is not always something that can be translated into
a simple feature such as tumors appear brighter.
Oftentimes, radiologists are seemingly able to just intuit
the appropriate diagnosis in the image
because they have seen tens of thousands of images,
and defining a set of features that they're looking for is not the full story.
When deep learning came along,
it started to solve this problem for us.
Deep learning algorithms discover features in a way
similar to how a human would discover features by looking at many,
many images and learning what makes certain images different from each other.
This technique proved to be superior to handcrafted features for machine learning,
for both cats and dogs,
and x-rays and mammograms.
Finally, like classic machine learning,
our deep learning algorithm returns an output
indicating whether or not a finding is present in an image.
The performance of deep learning shows to be most powerful when
we start having to deal with images in which differences are very subtle,
which is often the case in medical imaging.